%!TEX root = ../template.tex

\section{Conclusion}

Preserving the hygrothermal environment in museums and heritage buildings demands careful attention to artefact conservation. By integrating standards and guidelines, monitoring tasks, and modelling simulations, institutions can study further strategies to find more balanced solutions that need to find a good compromise among all decay methods of delicate materials. The adoption of these multidisciplinary approaches is critical to ensuring the sustainability of collections and cultural heritage buildings themselves, particularly as climate change and increasing visitor numbers are introducing new challenges in the future.

The present chapter started by surveying state-of-the-art guidelines and damage risk metrics, and proposed a framework to clarify the most adequate assessment tools. Based on available documentation, a need to evaluate the effectiveness of general guidelines against various types of damage-risk models (biological, chemical, and mechanical) was identified. The methodology referred to records of a six-year monitoring campaign of hygrothermal conditions in two case studies. Then, compliances between the guidelines and damage metrics were assessed using confusion matrices, which constituted a novelty in this type of approach. The analysis of compliance between general guidelines and damage risk models yielded several insights. General guidelines effectively addressed fungal and mechanical damage risks. However, they fell short in safeguarding against insect and chemical damage. Among the tested guidelines in these case studies, ASHRAE Class B emerged as a reliable standard for assessing chemical and mechanical risks. At the same time, EN16893 was most effective for mitigating biological damage risks -- \textbf{RQ1}.

The monitoring campaign combines in-situ records of temperature and relative humidity in the indoor environment and also within collections (hygrometers placed directly inside books). At the same time, modelling was employed to explore further the impact of opening doors and tourism, and estimate the thermal loads -- \textbf{RQ2}. 

This work supported the characterisation of the hygrothermal environment in Joanina Library and the validation of the hygrothermal model of the case study. Measurements demonstrated more thermal dependence on outdoor climate than on relative humidity, which showed weaker correlations. A seasonality of the indoor parameters was identified, with Summer and Winter being the most harmful. The running periods recommended by guidelines to predict the books' response to fluctuations were contested. It was recommended that the historical climate should be calculated using periods of 10~h and 21~days for temperature and relative humidity, respectively, which are different from those recommended. From a decay perspective, collections were more exposed to chemical decay (and some biological) than mechanical decay. 

Tourism impact was not noticeable when comparing the historical climate throughout the six years, but increased the hygrothermal parameters during periods of high tourist rates in the Summer. During the Winter, the sensible heat load generated by occupants can help reduce relative humidity. Nonetheless, both the number of visitors and respective metabolic rates are noticed, slightly the natural conditions of the indoor environment -- \textbf{RQ3}.   

When looking for solutions, some passive strategies were contemplated. It was shown that opening the main door promoted the interaction between indoors and outdoors, although it was not proven that there is a negative impact or an improvement in conservation conditions from the analysis of data from devices placed inside books. Similarly, creating an alternative entrance did not significantly improve the indoor conditions. Therefore, six dehumidifiers were installed on the Noble floor to reduce humidity levels. It is recommended that further solutions should be investigated, namely, exploring climate control systems for cooling during the Summer to reduce temperature and relative humidity (chemical and biological risk, insect pests), and heating during the Winter to reduce peaks of relative humidity (biological risk, fungal) -- \textbf{RQ4}. Besides the technical challenge of incrementally controlling the historical climate to minimise risks, the job becomes even harder when looking for an equilibrium between conservation and energy consumption, especially for the coming years with the problem of climate change.